README.md, before:

# Control of Falling Liquid Films

Code for modelling thin liquid films controlled by baseplate actuators. Written for LINK TO PAPER by [Oscar Holroyd](https://warwick.ac.uk/fac/sci/hetsys/people/studentscohort3/holroyd/), supervised by [Radu Cimpeanu](https://warwick.ac.uk/fac/sci/maths/people/staff/cimpeanu/) and [Susana Gomes](https://warwick.ac.uk/fac/sci/maths/people/staff/gomes).

- [Installation](#installation)
- [Running the Code](#running-the-code)
- [Input Parameters](#input-parameters)
- [Mathematical Background](#mathematical-background)


# Installation
* The code relies on [Basilisk](<http://basilisk.fr/>) to model the Navier-Stokes equations. See the [installation page](<http://basilisk.fr/src/INSTALL>) for instructions. Note that bview is *not* required. Make sure that qcc (or a symlink to it) is on your PATH.
* The LQR controls require a functioning [LAPACKE](https://netlib.org/lapack/lapacke.html) implementation.

Once these are installed, the executables can be generated:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/OaHolroyd/falling-film-control
cd falling-film-control
make source
make
```
Note that on some systems (eg the University of Warwick's SCRTP resources) the LAPACK library is linked with `-lopenblas`. If compilation fails, try linking with `-llapacke`.

The three resulting executables (`film-ns`, `film-wr`, and `film-benney`) use the specified system to model the thin film. Note that the option to finish the NS simulation early (in the case of failure to control or successful stabilisation) is set to true by default. To change this, change the value of `EARLY_EXIT` in [src/params.h](src/params.h) and recompile the code.


# Running the Code

For a given set of parameters, the code will print the total cost
```math
\kappa = \int_0^T \int_0^L \mu (h(x)-1)^2 + (1-\mu) f^2 \text{d}x \text{d}t
```
to `stdout`. All other outputs (dimensionless numbers, simulation progress etc.) are printed to `stderr`.

## Requirements
The code requires an input JSON file containing physical parameters, solver settings and output details. An example of such a file (containing parameters corresponding to a thin liquid water film) is included in [params.json](params.json). If you wish to use an alternative file, pass its' path as the first (and only) argument to `film-<model>`.

The code outputs 0D, 1D, and 2D data under the directory 'out', and full variable outputs under 'dump'. These directories must exist for the code to run (and are created by `make`).

## Visualisation
The output data is stored as plain text, timestamped on the first line and subsequently in a format easily read by [gnuplot](http://www.gnuplot.info/) or [pgfplots](https://ctan.org/pkg/pgfplots). The Python helper script [analysis.py](analysis.py) includes basic plotting functionality.

## Restarting
Basilisk includes the option to 'dump' the entire simulation to a single file, which can then be restored to continue the simulation from the output time. By default this occurs every 100 time-units. Since stable travelling waves take a long time to develop for most parameter regimes it is *strongly suggested* that a single run without controls is performed to generate a dump-file with a travelling wave before loading it and beginning controls after this point. To do this set the value `"t0"` to correspond to the file at dump/dump-\<time\>.


# Input Parameters
All of the parameters are either in SI units or dimensionless. The keys in [params.json](params.json) are hopefully fairly self-explanatory. However, below is a full description.

### Domain parameters
* **`h0`** the thickness of a uniform film - m
* **`Lx`** the ratio of film thickness to domain length
* **`Ly`** the ratio of film thickness to domain height (including air layer)
* **`theta`** the angle of the plate from horizontal - rad
* **`tmax`** the simulation end time - dimensionless
* **`t0`** the start time (either 0 or matching a [dump file](#restarting)) - dimensionless

### Physical parameters
* **`rho_l`** fluid-phase density - kg m^-3
* **`rho_g`** gas-phase density - kg m^-3
* **`mu_l`** fluid-phase dynamic viscosity - kg m^-1 s^-1
* **`mu_g`** gas-phase dynamic viscosity - kg m^-1 s^-1
* **`gamma`** surface tension - N m^-1
* **`grav`** gravitational acceleration - m s^-2

### Solver parameters
* **`level`** the grid refinement level (resulting in 2^level gridcells)
* **`dtout`** output timestep - dimensionless
* **`output`** output dimension (0, 1 or 2 dimensional data)

### Control parameters
* **`M`** number of actuators - integer
* **`P`** number of observers - integer
* **`start`** control start time - dimensionless
* **`width`** actuator and observer width parameter. As this approaches 0 the actuators and observers tend towards Dirac delta distributions. If this is too small for the grid to resolve this may cause unexpected results. - dimensionless
* **`alpha`** control strength parameter - dimensionless
* **`del`** actuator/actuator upstream offset - dimensionless
* **`mu`** interface/control cost weighting - dimensionless
* **`rom`** the reduced order model to use for the control strategy - "benney" or "wr"
* **`strategy`** the type of control to use - "pair" or "lqr"


# Mathematical Background
The purpose of this code is to control a thin liquid film to the flat, Nusselt solution. The Navier-Stokes equations are too complex to apply any established control theoretical results to, and so we instead turn to a hierarchical control method, using reduced order models.

## Reduced order models
We currently consider two ROMs. Instead of describing the evolution of velocity and pressure, they describe the evolution of the film height $h$ and the heigh-averaged flux $q$, with a forcing term $f$ that comes from fluid injection through the base. This results in a mass-conservation equation
```math
h_t + q_x = f.
```

To close the system, the **Benney** equation slaves the flux to the height
```math
q = \frac{h^3}{3}\left(2-2h_x \cot\theta + \frac{h_{xxx}}{Ca}\right) + Re\left(\frac{8h^6h_x}{15} - \frac{2h^4f}{3}\right),
```
and the **weighted-residual** system requires an additional evolution equation for $q$:
```math
\frac{2Reh^2q_t}{5} + q = \frac{h^3}{3}\left(2-2h_x \cot\theta + \frac{h_{xxx}}{Ca}\right) + Re\left(\frac{18q^2h_x}{35} - \frac{34hqq_x}{35} + \frac{hqf}{5}\right).
```

We can then implement control strategies to control the Navier-Stokes system by making the assumption that it is well-approximated by one of these simpler models and applying controls as if we were aiming to control the alternative system rather than the original.

## Control strategies
There are four strategies that we consider.

### Paired actuators/observers
Here we simply couple an equal number of observers and actuators, with a fixed shift between them. The control is then simply
```math
f_i = -\alpha \left(h(x_i - \delta) - 1\right).
```

### Unrestricted LQR controls
If we relax the restriction of discrete observers, giving the control access to the full interface, we can further simplify the problem by linearising it:
```math
h_t = J(h-1) + \Psi K(h-1).
```
The control operator $K$ that minimises the cost $\kappa$ is provided by the [Linear-Quadratic Regulator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linear%E2%80%93quadratic_regulator).

Commit message:

added helper script to README

README.md, after:

# Control of Falling Liquid Films

Code for modelling thin liquid films controlled by baseplate actuators. Written for LINK TO PAPER by [Oscar Holroyd](https://warwick.ac.uk/fac/sci/hetsys/people/studentscohort3/holroyd/), supervised by [Radu Cimpeanu](https://warwick.ac.uk/fac/sci/maths/people/staff/cimpeanu/) and [Susana Gomes](https://warwick.ac.uk/fac/sci/maths/people/staff/gomes).

- [Installation](#installation)
- [Running the Code](#running-the-code)
- [Input Parameters](#input-parameters)
- [Mathematical Background](#mathematical-background)


# Installation
* The code relies on [Basilisk](<http://basilisk.fr/>) to model the Navier-Stokes equations. See the [installation page](<http://basilisk.fr/src/INSTALL>) for instructions. Note that bview is *not* required. Make sure that qcc (or a symlink to it) is on your PATH.
* The LQR controls require a functioning [LAPACKE](https://netlib.org/lapack/lapacke.html) implementation.

Once these are installed, the executables can be generated:
```bash
git clone https://github.com/OaHolroyd/falling-film-control
cd falling-film-control
make source
make
```
Note that on some systems (eg the University of Warwick's SCRTP resources) the LAPACK library is linked with `-lopenblas`. If compilation fails, try linking with `-llapacke`.

The three resulting executables (`film-ns`, `film-wr`, and `film-benney`) use the specified system to model the thin film. Note that the option to finish the NS simulation early (in the case of failure to control or successful stabilisation) is set to true by default. To change this, change the value of `EARLY_EXIT` in [src/params.h](src/params.h) and recompile the code.


# Running the Code

For a given set of parameters, the code will print the total cost
```math
\kappa = \int_0^T \int_0^L \mu (h(x)-1)^2 + (1-\mu) f^2 \text{d}x \text{d}t
```
to `stdout`. All other outputs (dimensionless numbers, simulation progress etc.) are printed to `stderr`.

## Requirements
The code requires an input JSON file containing physical parameters, solver settings and output details. An example of such a file (containing parameters corresponding to a thin liquid water film) is included in [params.json](params.json). If you wish to use an alternative file, pass its' path as the first (and only) argument to `film-<model>`.

The code outputs 0D, 1D, and 2D data under the directory 'out', and full variable outputs under 'dump'. These directories must exist for the code to run (and are created by `make`).

## Visualisation
The output data is stored as plain text, timestamped on the first line and subsequently in a format easily read by [gnuplot](http://www.gnuplot.info/) or [pgfplots](https://ctan.org/pkg/pgfplots). The Python helper script [analysis.py](analysis.py) includes basic plotting functionality.

## Restarting
Basilisk includes the option to 'dump' the entire simulation to a single file, which can then be restored to continue the simulation from the output time. By default this occurs every 100 time-units. Since stable travelling waves take a long time to develop for most parameter regimes it is *strongly suggested* that a single run without controls is performed to generate a dump-file with a travelling wave before loading it and beginning controls after this point. To do this set the value `"t0"` to correspond to the file at dump/dump-\<time\>.

## Helper script
Included in the repo is the helper script [analysis.py](analysis.py). It is currently set up to perform multiple runs across ranges of Reynolds and capillary numbers. However, the base class `FilmModel` should be relatively simple to rework if you need to iterate over other sets of parameters.


# Input Parameters
All of the parameters are either in SI units or dimensionless. The keys in [params.json](params.json) are hopefully fairly self-explanatory. However, below is a full description.

### Domain parameters
* **`h0`** the thickness of a uniform film - m
* **`Lx`** the ratio of film thickness to domain length
* **`Ly`** the ratio of film thickness to domain height (including air layer)
* **`theta`** the angle of the plate from horizontal - rad
* **`tmax`** the simulation end time - dimensionless
* **`t0`** the start time (either 0 or matching a [dump file](#restarting)) - dimensionless

### Physical parameters
* **`rho_l`** fluid-phase density - kg m^-3
* **`rho_g`** gas-phase density - kg m^-3
* **`mu_l`** fluid-phase dynamic viscosity - kg m^-1 s^-1
* **`mu_g`** gas-phase dynamic viscosity - kg m^-1 s^-1
* **`gamma`** surface tension - N m^-1
* **`grav`** gravitational acceleration - m s^-2

### Solver parameters
* **`level`** the grid refinement level (resulting in 2^level gridcells)
* **`dtout`** output timestep - dimensionless
* **`output`** output dimension (0, 1 or 2 dimensional data)

### Control parameters
* **`M`** number of actuators - integer
* **`P`** number of observers - integer
* **`start`** control start time - dimensionless
* **`width`** actuator and observer width parameter. As this approaches 0 the actuators and observers tend towards Dirac delta distributions. If this is too small for the grid to resolve this may cause unexpected results. - dimensionless
* **`alpha`** control strength parameter - dimensionless
* **`del`** actuator/actuator upstream offset - dimensionless
* **`mu`** interface/control cost weighting - dimensionless
* **`rom`** the reduced order model to use for the control strategy - "benney" or "wr"
* **`strategy`** the type of control to use - "pair" or "lqr"


# Mathematical Background
The purpose of this code is to control a thin liquid film to the flat, Nusselt solution. The Navier-Stokes equations are too complex to apply any established control theoretical results to, and so we instead turn to a hierarchical control method, using reduced order models.

## Reduced order models
We currently consider two ROMs. Instead of describing the evolution of velocity and pressure, they describe the evolution of the film height $h$ and the heigh-averaged flux $q$, with a forcing term $f$ that comes from fluid injection through the base. This results in a mass-conservation equation
```math
h_t + q_x = f.
```

To close the system, the **Benney** equation slaves the flux to the height
```math
q = \frac{h^3}{3}\left(2-2h_x \cot\theta + \frac{h_{xxx}}{Ca}\right) + Re\left(\frac{8h^6h_x}{15} - \frac{2h^4f}{3}\right),
```
and the **weighted-residual** system requires an additional evolution equation for $q$:
```math
\frac{2Reh^2q_t}{5} + q = \frac{h^3}{3}\left(2-2h_x \cot\theta + \frac{h_{xxx}}{Ca}\right) + Re\left(\frac{18q^2h_x}{35} - \frac{34hqq_x}{35} + \frac{hqf}{5}\right).
```

We can then implement control strategies to control the Navier-Stokes system by making the assumption that it is well-approximated by one of these simpler models and applying controls as if we were aiming to control the alternative system rather than the original.

## Control strategies
There are four strategies that we consider.

### Paired actuators/observers
Here we simply couple an equal number of observers and actuators, with a fixed shift between them. The control is then simply
```math
f_i = -\alpha \left(h(x_i - \delta) - 1\right).
```

### Unrestricted LQR controls
If we relax the restriction of discrete observers, giving the control access to the full interface, we can further simplify the problem by linearising it:
```math
h_t = J(h-1) + \Psi K(h-1).
```
The control operator $K$ that minimises the cost $\kappa$ is provided by the [Linear-Quadratic Regulator](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Linear%E2%80%93quadratic_regulator).
